Add a README.md (#14)
mainmatter/ember-vite-codemod: README.md

# ember-vite-codemod

Migrate your Ember app to build with Vite.

## Usage

> This codemod will add, move and modify files in your Ember app to make it build with Vite. Make sure your git repository is clean.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This codemod will add, move and modify files in your Ember app to make it build with Vite. Make sure your git repository is clean before running this command so you can easily compare the changes.
```

| --ts            |  false  | Use this option to indicate your app uses typescript. It will impact what files the codemod creates and the packages it installs.                                                                                                          |
| --error-trace   |  false  | In case of error, use this option to print the full error trace when it's available.                                                                                                                                                       |

## Steps

The codemod executes a sequence of several ordered tasks. At the end of the process, reinstall your dependencies; if your app follows the standards the codemod expects, it should now builds correctly using Vite. If something went wrong, the sections below detail what the codemod expectations are and what it tries to output so you can figure out how to complete the migration manually.

### Checking for unsupported dependencies

This is a verification task, it doesn't change your code.

> The codemod will first check there are no known dependency that is incompatible with the way Vite works. `ember-fetch` needs to go.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The codemod will first check there are no known dependency that is incompatible with the way Vite works. e.g. `ember-fetch` will not work with Vite and needs to be removed.
```

### Checking addons are v2

This is a verification task, it doesn't change your code.

The codemod will look at all your Ember dependencies and will advise you for updates.

> When you use Embroider in an app that depends on v1 addons, Embroider will try to auto-fix the v1 addons a way that make them compatible with Vite. This approach works for a number of known addons, but we cannot guarantee it will work for any v1 addon you use. The best way to avoid issues is that your classic app already relies only on v2 addons, and the codemod will guide you in that direction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use Embroider in an app that depends on v1 addons, Embroider will try to auto-fix the v1 addons in a way that makes them compatible with Vite. This approach works for a number of known addons, but we cannot guarantee it will work for any v1 addon you use. The best way to avoid issues is that your classic app already relies only on v2 addons, and the codemod will guide you in that direction:
```

> - If one of your addons is v1 but the latest version on npm is v2, it's recommended to update.

Reviewer: something I realised yesterday is that some of the v1 addons are getting updated to not even be addons at all i.e. that there is no `ember-addon` key in the package.json essentially making them a basic package.

This is a **positive** thing and should be considered a case of recommending they upgrade 👍

> - If one of your addons is v1 and no v2 format is available, it's recommended to look for a different alternative or make the addon v2.

Reviewer: So I don't know that I want this to be a failure case. I missed this in the review of the implementation but essentially we can still warn if there are v1 addons that don't have v2 versions to upgrade to but we shouldn't exit in this case. Let me know if that makes sense 🙈

> - If one of your v1 addons but is known as being correctly rewriten by Embroider, the codemod won't notice you about it.

Reviewer: we should remove this bullet point once we correct the implementation and the above point. Essentially we don't want to give people the impression that they need to upgrade **every** v1 addon, but it makes sense that we do if there is a v2 available

Author: I interpreted it more like since there's a v1 addon that is not in the whitelist, there's a chance it doesn't work (if Embroider can't rewrite it correctly for some reason), so maybe you want to change this now. But making it a warning is fine.

> - If one of your v1 addons comes from Ember app blueprint and is no longer used in Embroider+Vite world, the codemod won't notice you about it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If one of your v1 addons comes from Ember app blueprint and is no longer used in Embroider+Vite world, the codemod won't notify you about it (because it will be removed in a later step).
```

### Creating new required files

From this step, the codemod is done with verifications and starts modifying your code.

First, it creates new files that are now required for Embroider+Vite. These files are copied direclty from the [embroider-build/app-blueprint](https://github.com/embroider-build/app-blueprint), so you can refer to this repository to see the expected content:

- [app/config/environment.js](https://github.com/embroider-build/app-blueprint/blob/main/files-override/shared/app/config/environment.js)
- [vite.config.mjs](https://github.com/embroider-build/app-blueprint/blob/main/files-override/shared/vite.config.mjs)
- [babel.config.cjs](https://github.com/embroider-build/app-blueprint/blob/main/files/js/babel.config.cjs)

> ### Moving `index.html` at the root

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Moving `index.html` to the root
```

> Vite expects the `index.html` to be at the root of the app. The codemod will move your existing `app/index.html` at the root rather than creating a new file, this way it keeps all the customizations you added.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vite expects the `index.html` to be at the root of the app. The codemod will move your existing `app/index.html` to the root rather than creating a new file, this way it keeps all the customizations you added.
```

Instead of building the app directly with Broccoli, we use `@embroider/compat`, a module that essentially serves as a bridge between classic apps and modern Vite apps. The Broccoli app instance is still there, but it's passed in argument to Embroider.

Considering an empty 6.2 Ember app, the codemod does the following:

```diff
 'use strict';

  const EmberApp = require('ember-cli/lib/broccoli/ember-app');
+ const { compatBuild } = require('@embroider/compat');

  module.exports = function (defaults) {
+   const { buildOnce } = await import('@embroider/vite');
    const app = new EmberApp(defaults, {
      // Add options here
    });

-   return app.toTree();
+   return compatBuild(app, buildOnce);
  };
```

### Running code replacements on... `testem.js`

The change in this file introduces a new way to prevent its execution when tests run directly in the browser.

The codemod looks for the `module.exports` and wraps it in a conditional that checks the `module` existence.

```diff
  'use strict';

+ if (typeof module !== 'undefined') {
    module.exports = { ... }
+ }
```

### Running code replacements on... `tests/test-helper.js`

> If you go back to the modifications done in `tests/index.html`, you can see the new script imports ` { start } from './test-helper`, registers the test files then call `start`. The `start` function is the one the codemod creates at the present step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you go back to the modifications done in `tests/index.html`, you can see the new script imports ` { start } from './test-helper`, registers the test files then calls `start`. The `start` function is the one the codemod creates in this step.
```

> Instead of loading the tests then calling `start` from `ember-qunit` directly, we rather export a `start` function that can be called later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of loading the tests then calling `start` from `ember-qunit` directly in the module scope of the file, we instead export a `start` function that can be called later.
```

Considering an empty 6.2 Ember app, the codemod does the following:

```diff
  import Application from 'my-empty-classic-app/app';
  import config from 'my-empty-classic-app/config/environment';
  import * as QUnit from 'qunit';
  import { setApplication } from '@ember/test-helpers';
  import { setup } from 'qunit-dom';
- import { loadTests } from 'ember-qunit/test-loader';
- import { start, setupEmberOnerrorValidation } from 'ember-qunit';
+ import { start as qunitStart, setupEmberOnerrorValidation } from 'ember-qunit';

+ export function start() {
    setApplication(Application.create(config.APP));

    setup(QUnit.assert);
    setupEmberOnerrorValidation();
-   loadTests();
-   start();
+   qunitStart();
+ }
```

### Running replacements on... `package.json`

> Last but not least, the codemod will modify three sort of things in the `package.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last but not least, the codemod will modify three sorts of things in the `package.json`:
```

Reviewer: I hate this suggestion 😭 it's one of the "this feels strange so it's probably right" kind of English suggestions 🫠
